Exhaustive lists of works covered by copyright are usually not to be found in legislation. 
Nonetheless, broadly speaking, works commonly protected by copyright throughout the world include: literary works such as novels, poems, plays, reference works, newspaper articles; computer programs, databases; films, musical compositions, and choreography; artistic works such as paintings, drawings, photographs, and sculpture; architecture; and advertisements, maps, and technical drawings.
Copyright protection extends only to expressions, and not to ideas, procedures, methods of operation or mathematical concepts as such. 
Copyright may or may not be available for a number of objects such as titles, slogans, or logos, depending on whether they contain sufficient authorship.
Frequently Asked Questions: Copyright
Basics
What is copyright?
Copyright (or author’s right) is a legal term used to describe the rights that creators have over their literary and artistic works.
What can be protected using copyright? 
Exhaustive lists of works covered by copyright are usually not to be found in legislation.
Nonetheless, broadly speaking, works commonly protected by copyright throughout the world include: literary works such as novels, poems, plays, reference works, newspaper articles; computer programs, databases; films, musical compositions, and choreography; artistic works such as paintings, drawings, photographs, and sculpture; architecture; and advertisements, maps, and technical drawings.
Copyright protection extends only to expressions, and not to ideas, procedures, methods of operation or mathematical concepts as such.
Copyright may or may not be available for a number of objects such as titles, slogans, or logos, depending on whether they contain sufficient authorship.
What rights does copyright give me? What are my rights as author of a work?
There are two types of rights under copyright:
economic rights, which allow the rights owner to derive financial reward from the use of his works by others; and
moral rights, which protect the non-economic interests of the author.
Most copyright laws state that the rights owner has the economic right to authorize or prevent certain uses in relation to a work or, in some cases, to receive remuneration for the use of his work (such as through collective management).
The economic rights owner of a work can prohibit or authorize: its reproduction in various forms, such as printed publication or sound recording; its public performance, such as in a play or musical work; its recording, for example, in the form of compact discs or DVDs; its broadcasting, by radio, cable or satellite; its translation into other languages; and its adaptation, such as a novel into a film screenplay.
Examples of widely recognized moral rights include the right to claim authorship of a work and the right to oppose changes to a work that could harm the creator's reputation.
Can I register copyright? 
In the majority of countries, and according to the Berne Convention, copyright protection is obtained automatically without the need for registration or other formalities.
Most countries nonetheless have a system in place to allow for the voluntary registration of works.
Such voluntary registration systems can help solve disputes over ownership or creation, as well as facilitate financial transactions, sales, and the assignment and/or transfer of rights.
What is a “work”? 
The term “work” is used in the copyright context to refer to a wide range of intellectual creations, from novels to architecture, computer programs, and more..
What is the © symbol? Do I need to include it on my work? 
In the past, some countries had legislation in place that required the copyright holder to comply with certain formalities in order to receive copyright protection.
One of those formalities was to include an indication that copyright had been claimed, such as by using the symbol ©.
Currently, very few countries still impose formalities on copyright, therefore the use of such symbols is no longer a legal requirement.
Nonetheless, many right owners still include the symbol © as a highly visible way to emphasize that that work is protected by copyright and that all rights are reserved, as opposed to a less restrictive license.
How long does copyright protection last? 
Economic rights have a time limit, which can vary according to national law.
In those countries which are members of the Berne Convention, the time limit should be equal to or longer than 50 years after the creator’s death.
Longer periods of protection may however be provided at the national level.
Protecting your work 
Can I protect my works internationally using copyright?
Firstly, copyright protection is automatic in all states party to the Berne Convention.
Whilst there may be nuances to the particular national laws applicable in these states, in general there is a high degree of harmony
When we consider states that are not party to the Berne Convention, you must remember that copyright laws are territorial.
In other words, they apply within the country in which they were passed.
As such, if you wish to protect your work internationally, you must research and make sure that you comply with the relevant legal requirements in the country(ies) in which you wish your work to be protected.
What does it mean to “license” my works and how can I do it? 
Once you are the right owner of a work, you can provide authorization for others to use or exploit your work.
Such authorizations are commonly referred to as “licenses” and may or may not entail paying the rights owner.
Naturally, it is always recommended to seek expert legal advice before negotiating a licensing agreement.
If you wish to license your work to users such as broadcasters, publishers, or even entertainment establishments (i.e. bars, nightclubs), joining a collective management organization (CMO) may be a good option.
CMOs monitor uses of works on behalf of creators and publishers and are in charge of negotiating licenses and collecting remuneration.
They are particularly common in the field of musical and literary works where there may be a large number of users of the same work and it would be difficult both for the owner of rights and the users to seek specific authorization for every single use and to monitor them.
Can I copyright my software or mobile app?
Computer programs and other types of software are considered as literary works for copyright purposes.
Therefore they receive automatic protection without the need for registration.
In some countries, the process of voluntary registration for software may differ from that for other types of work.
Is there a copyright registry/depositary? 
There is no searchable international registry of copyright-protected works.
This is because, as a general rule, copyright protection is automatic and does not depend on registration.
In some countries, however you may encounter a voluntary copyright registry/depositary and registering your work can be a smart choice as it would considerably assist you in the case of a dispute, for example over the ownership of the work.
Although it may not affect copyright protection, some countries do require a deposit of samples of printed materials published in that country.
My published work has been reproduced without my permission. What can I do?
Before taking any steps, you should carefully assess whether the reproduction is in fact an infringement of your copyright.
If you consider that there is an infringement of your right, you should try to identify the person responsible.
If it is impossible or inappropriate to solve the problem by informal means, you can seek a legal remedy from a court or other authority.
It is usually possible to bring a claim before a civil court for monetary compensation and also to prevent the continuation or repetition of the infringement.
Before taking this step though it is often advisable – and even compulsory in some states –to first send a formal notification to the alleged infringer, requesting him to stop the infringement and/or to pay compensation.
Alternatively, if the unauthorized reproduction amounts to the criminal offence of copyright piracy, a complaint may be submitted to the police, public prosecutor or other competent authority in accordance with applicable local law.
In some cases, the use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms (such as mediation, arbitration, expert determination, neutral evaluation, etc.) can provide a valuable alternative to court procedures, as they may lead to a settlement of the dispute in a simpler, faster and cheaper way.
If the unauthorized reproduction of the work is being made available through the internet, it may be possible to notify the relevant internet service provider, asking it to prevent access to the infringing copy.
Such procedures are generally known as “notice-and-take-down (procedures)”.
If you are a member of a Collective Management Organization (CMO), it will often be enough to request it to take the appropriate steps.
If you are not, it is up to you to act in order to protect your rights. It is often advisable, in such a case, to instruct a lawyer to do so on your behalf.
How can I manage copyright-protected works? What are collective management organizations?
Collective management organizations (CMOs) monitor uses of works on behalf of creators and are in charge of negotiating licenses and collecting remuneration.
They are particularly common in the field of musical and literary works where there may be a large number of users of the same work and it would be difficult both for the owner of rights and the users to seek specific authorization for every single use and to monitor them.
How can I find the copyright laws of various countries?
WIPO Lex provides easy access to intellectual property legislation from a wide range of countries and regions as well as to treaties on intellectual property.
Many national or regional intellectual property offices also provide information concerning national or regional legislation on their websites.
Using other people's work
Who owns the copyright to a work? If I create a work whilst in employment, who is the copyright holder?
The first owner of copyright to a work is generally the original creator or author of the work. There are, however, some exceptions to this rule.
In some countries, for example, the economic rights to a copyright work initially rest with the person/organization employing the creator.
In other countries the economic rights are deemed to be automatically assigned or transferred to the employer.
Do I need authorization to use a work protected by copyright?
In general you always need authorization (this may take the form of licensing or an assignment of rights) before using a protected work.
For certain uses, the authorization may come from a collective management organization instead of directly from the right owner, for example the authorization to use a song at a public concert.
You may be allowed to use a protected work without any kind of authorization under two sets of circumstances:
Limitations and exceptions may exist at the national level, allowing you to use the work.
Works can also sometimes be made publicly available under specific conditions or licenses that allow certain uses. When using such works, attention must be paid to the specific conditions of the licenses in order to identify exactly what is and isn’t permitted by the right owner. There are several such licenses in common usage, e.g. the Creative Commons license, MIT License, the Mozilla Public License, and many others.
If you are in doubt, it is always advisable to speak to an intellectual property attorney.
How can I identify and get in touch with the copyright owner of a work?
As most countries do not impose any formalities on the provision of copyright protection, locating the rights owner of a work can sometimes be difficult.
Finding the rights owner of a specific work in a territory is usually possible if you contact: the author or the publisher or a work, the collective management organization, the local registry of works, or the national copyright office.
Such organizations may have databases that contain valuable information about ownership of copyrighted works.
Collective management organizations may also assist you in obtaining authorization from the right owner of a work.
What are limitations and exceptions to copyright?
In some cases it may be possible to use works that are not in the public domain without needing to request authorization from or remunerate the author or the right owner.
This can occur if such uses are covered by limitations and exceptions in the national legislation.
Examples of limitations and exceptions include: the quotation of works; the use of news of the day; or the creation of accessible formats for print disabled people.
What is “fair use”?
Differing legal systems mean that under some systems, a clear list of limitations and exceptions to copyright is provided, whilst in others you may only find a general clause.
Such general clauses are frequently known as “fair use” or “fair dealing” clauses.
What is a work “in the public domain”?
When a work is said to be in the public domain (also referred to as “commons”) what is meant is that the work no longer has a right owner (of the economic rights).
This is usually because the term of copyright protection has expired.
For example, the economic rights over the famous poem Odyssey, written by Homer, have lapsed and the work can be used or exploited without the need to obtain authorization or remunerate the right owner.
In some countries, authors can also voluntarily include their works in the public domain through a procedure known as “voluntary relinquishment”.
Can I freely use works published on the Internet?
A common misperception is that works published on the Internet, including on social media platforms, are in the public domain and may therefore be widely used by anybody without the authorization of the right owner.
Any works protected by copyright or related rights – ranging from musical compositions, to multimedia products, newspaper articles, and audiovisual productions – for which the time of protection has not expired, are protected regardless of whether they are published on paper or digitally.
In each case you should, generally, seek the authorization of the right owner prior to use.
Some websites contain a general license that may exempt you from requiring a direct authorization for certain uses.
Such licenses may authorize only certain uses, for example some non-commercial uses.
In practice, with regards to a text publicly available on a blog or a website for example, you may not use the text unless: such intended use is covered by the general license granted through that website; the use is covered by a copyright limitation or exception; or you have obtained authorization for such use.
Similarly, authorization is required if your SME is engaged in publishing or making available copyright works, sound recordings, broadcasts or performances through your website.
What are related or neighboring rights?
Related or neighboring rights are a separate set of copyright-type rights given to certain persons or bodies that help make works available to the public.
The beneficiaries of related rights in national legislations are usually performers, producers of phonograms, and broadcasting organizations.
The terms can also refer to rights given to persons or bodies, who produce subject matter which, while not qualifying as works under the copyright systems of some countries, contain sufficient creativity or technical and organizational skill to justify recognition via a right similar to copyright.
Some laws make clear that the exercise of related rights should leave intact, and in no way affect, the protection of copyright.
Patents
What is a patent?
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, a new way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a problem.
To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application.
What kind of protection does a patent offer?
In principle, the patent owner has the exclusive right to prevent or stop others from commercially exploiting the patented invention.
In other words, patent protection means that the invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed, imported or sold by others without the patent owner's consent.
Is a patent valid in every country?
Patents are territorial rights.
In general, the exclusive rights are only applicable in the country or region in which a patent has been filed and granted, in accordance with the law of that country or region.
How long does a patent last?
The protection is granted for a limited period, generally 20 years from the filing date of the application.
Patent topics and issues
Patents are not just abstract concepts; they play an invaluable, practical role in everyday life.
By rewarding ideas, patents encourage the development of innovations and new technologies in every field.
Biotech and genes
To what extent are biotechnology processes and products patentable?
How do gene patents affect medical care and gene testing research and development?
Opinions are divided.
Computer programs
Software producers need protection against unauthorized copying in order to recoup their investments, but using patents for this raises questions.
Nanotechnology
While nanotechnology innovations appear generally suitable for patent protection, certain issues require further consideration.
Patent law and treaties
The treaties WIPO administers, together with national and regional laws, make up the international legal framework for patents.
Patent-related treaties
Paris Convention
The first major international agreement relating to the protection of industrial property rights, including patents.
It outlines, in particular, national treatment, the right of priority, and a number of common rules in the field of substantive patent law.
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
This treaty established an international patent filing system, making it possible to seek patent protection for an invention simultaneously in each of a large number of countries.
Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patent Classification
A regularly updated international system for classifying inventions in patent applications, allowing more efficient search and retrieval of patent information.
Patent Law Treaty (PLT)
The PLT establishes common and, as a general rule, maximum requirements regarding many of the procedural formalities relating to national/regional patent applications and patents.
Budapest Treaty
The Budapest Treaty concerns the international disclosure of biotechnological inventions.
It stipulates that, for the purpose of the patent procedure, the deposit of microorganisms with an "international depository authority" must be recognized by any contracting state.
IP laws and treaties (WIPO Lex)
The WIPO Lex database is a comprehensive search tool that allows you to search international treaties and national laws on intellectual property.
Legislative and policy advice
WIPO provides extensive legislative assistance to developing countries on request, including advice in exploiting the flexibilities under international treaties in implementing their obligations.
Patent filing
PCT — The international patent system
The Patent and Cooperation Treaty (PCT) allows you to make a single international patent application that has the same effect as national applications filed in separate PCT states.
In a nutshell, you benefit from one application, in one language paid for in one currency.
DAS and CASE — Services for patent offices
The WIPO Digital Access Service (DAS) allows priority and other similar documents to be securely exchanged among participating intellectual property offices.
The Centralized Access to Search and Examination (CASE) system enables patent offices to securely share the search and examination documentation related to patent applications, facilitating a more effective and efficient international examination process.
Patent search and analysis
PATENTSCOPE
Using PATENTSCOPE you can search through more than 43 million patent documents, including international patent applications submitted under the PCT.
Patent Register Portal
The Patent Register Portal is your gateway to online patent registers and gazettes and to legal-status-related information from over 200 jurisdictions and patent information collections.
Patent Landscapes — a technology snapshot
Patent Landscape Reports describe the patent situation for a specific technology in a given geographical area.
Our reports break down and analyze key information from patent searches for easier visualization and comprehension.
IPC — Streamlining searches
The International Patent Classification (IPC) is used to classify patents and utility models according to the different areas of technology to which they relate.
Patents, technology and development
One of the main functions of the patent system is to foster technological innovation by providing an incentive for research and development.  The patent system also works to diseminate technical information and promote technology transfer.
Inventor Assistance Program (IAP)
The Inventor Assistance Program matches developing country inventors and small businesses with limited financial means with patent attorneys, who provide pro bono legal assistance to secure patent protection.
Patent Drafting Training Program
The Patent Drafting Training Program assists users of the patent system to develop practical skills in drafting and filing patent applications.
Technology and Innovation Support Centers (TISCs)
Our Technology and Innovation Support Center (TISC) program gives innovators in developing countries access to high quality technology information and related services to help them create, protect, and manage intellectual property rights.
Frequently Asked Questions: Patents
Basics
What is a patent?
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention.
In other words, a patent is an exclusive right to a product or a process that generally provides a new way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a problem.
To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application.
The patent owner may give permission to, or license, other parties to use the invention on mutually agreed terms.
The owner may also sell the right to the invention to someone else, who will then become the new owner of the patent.
Once a patent expires, the protection ends, and an invention enters the public domain; that is, anyone can commercially exploit the invention without infringing the patent.
What rights does a patent provide?
A patent owner has the right to decide who may – or may not – use the patented invention for the period in which the invention is protected.
In other words, patent protection means that the invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed, imported, or sold by others without the patent owner's consent.
What kinds of inventions can be protected?
Patents may be granted for inventions in any field of technology, from an everyday kitchen utensil to a nanotechnology chip.
An invention can be a product – such as a chemical compound, or a process, for example – or a process for producing a specific chemical compound.
Many products in fact contain a number of inventions.
For example, a laptop computer can involve hundreds of inventions, working together.
How long does patent protection last?
Patent protection is granted for a limited period, generally 20 years from the filing date of the application.
Is a patent valid in every country?
Patents are territorial rights.
In general, the exclusive rights are only applicable in the country or region in which a patent has been filed and granted, in accordance with the law of that country or region.
How are patent rights enforced?
Patent rights are usually enforced in a court on the initiative of the right owner.
In most systems a court of law has the authority to stop patent infringement.
However the main responsibility for monitoring, identifying, and taking action against infringers of a patent lies with the patent owner.
What does it mean to “license a patent” and why is it done?
Licensing a patent simply means that the patent owner grants permission to another individual/organization to make, use, sell etc. his/her patented invention.
This takes place according to agreed terms and conditions (for example, defining the amount and type of payment to be made by the licensee to the licensor), for a defined purpose, in a defined territory, and for an agreed period of time.
A patent owner may grant a license to a third party for many reasons.
The patent owner may not have the necessary manufacturing facilities, for example, and therefore opts to allow others to make and sell his/her patented invention in return for “royalty” payments.
Alternatively, a patent owner may have manufacturing facilities, but they may not be large enough to cover market demand. In this case, he/she may be interested in licensing the patent to another manufacturer in order to benefit from another income stream.
Another possible situation is one in which the patent owner wishes to concentrate on one geographic market; therefore the patent owner may choose to grant a license to another individual/organization, with interests in other geographical markets.
Entering into a licensing agreement can help to build a mutually-beneficial business relationship.
Unlike selling or transferring a patent to another party, the licensor continue to have property rights over the patented invention.
Why are patents useful (to society, business, individuals etc.)?
Patented inventions have, in fact, pervaded every aspect of human life, from electric lighting (patents held by Edison and Swan) and plastic (patents held by Baekeland), to ballpoint pens (patents held by Biro), and microprocessors (patents held by Intel, for example).
Patents provide incentives to and protection for individuals by offering them recognition for their creativity and the possibility of material reward for their inventions.
At the same time, the obligatory publication of patents and patent applications facilitates the mutually-beneficial spread of new knowledge and accelerates innovation activities by, for example, avoiding the necessity to “re-invent the wheel”.
Once knowledge is publicly available, by its nature, it can be used simultaneously by an unlimited number of persons.
While this is, without doubt, perfectly acceptable for public information, it causes a dilemma for the commercialization of technical knowledge.
In the absence of protection of such knowledge, “free-riders” could easily use technical knowledge embedded in inventions without any recognition of the creativity of the inventor or contribution to the investments made by the inventor. As a consequence, inventors would naturally be discouraged to bring new inventions to the market, and tend to keep their commercially valuable inventions secret.
A patent system intends to correct such under-provision of innovative activities by providing innovators with limited exclusive rights, thereby giving the innovators the possibility to receive appropriate returns on their innovative activities.
In a wider sense, the public disclosure of the technical knowledge in the patent, and the exclusive right granted by the patent, provide incentives for competitors to search for alternative solutions and to “invent around” the first invention.
These incentives and the dissemination of knowledge about new inventions encourage further innovation, which assures that the quality of human life and the well-being of society is continuously enhanced.
Applying for patent protection
What conditions must be met to obtain patent protection?
There are numerous conditions that must be met in order to obtain a patent and it is not possible to compile an exhaustive, universally applicable list.
However, some of the key conditions include the following: The invention must show an element of novelty; that is, some new characteristic which is not known in the body of existing knowledge in its technical field. This body of existing knowledge is called “prior art”. The invention must involve an “inventive step” or “non-obvious”, which means that it could not be obviously deduced by a person having ordinary skill in the relevant technical field. The invention must be capable of industrial application, meaning that it must be capable of being used for an industrial or business purpose beyond a mere theoretical phenomenon, or be useful. Its subject matter must be accepted as “patentable” under law. In many countries, scientific theories, aesthetic creations, mathematical methods, plant or animal varieties, discoveries of natural substances, commercial methods, methods for medical treatment (as opposed to medical products) or computer programs are generally not patentable. The invention must be disclosed in an application in a manner sufficiently clear and complete to enable it to be replicated by a person with an ordinary level of skill in the relevant technical field.
Who grants patents?
A patent is granted by a national patent office or by a regional office that carries out the task for a number of countries.
the following regional patent offices are in operation: African Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI) African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO) Eurasian Patent Organization (EAPO) European Patent Office (EPO) Patent Office of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC Patent Office)
Under such regional systems, an applicant requests protection for an invention in one or more member states of the regional organization in question.
The regional office accepts these patent applications, which have the same effect as national applications, or grants patents, if all the criteria for the grant of such a regional patent are met.
There is currently, no universal, international system for the grant of patents.
Do I need a patent attorney/agent to prepare and file a patent application?
In general, applicants can prepare their patent applications and file them without assistance from a patent attorney.
However, given the complexity of patent documents and the legal skills required, such as claim drafting, it is highly advisable to seek legal assistance from a patent attorney/agent when drafting a patent application.
Furthermore, the legislation of many countries requires that an applicant, whose ordinary residence or principal place of business is outside the country, be represented by an attorney or agent qualified in the country (which usually means an agent or attorney who resides and practices in that country).
Information on the qualified attorneys and agents can be obtained directly from national and regional IP offices.
How much does it cost to patent an invention?
The costs vary considerably from country to country (and even within a country).
As the official fees vary widely from country to country, please contact the relevant national or regional patent office which will be able to give you details on the fee structure.
The cost of patenting an invention depends on factors such as the nature of the invention, its complexity, patent attorney’s fees, the length of the application, and possible objections raised during the examination by the patent office.
Some countries offer discounts to small- and medium-sized enterprises and applicants filing the application online.
In addition, some countries allow expedited examination upon payment of additional fees.
In addition to the national official filing fees, once a patent is granted by the patent office, you must pay maintenance or renewal fees, generally on an annual basis, to maintain the validity of the patent.
In case you decide to patent your invention abroad, you should also consider the relevant official filing fees for each country in question, the translation costs, and the costs of using local patent agents, which is a requirement in many countries for foreign applicants.
How can patents be obtained worldwide?
At present, you cannot obtain a universal “world patent” or “international patent”.
Patents are territorial rights.
In general, an application for a patent must be filed, and the patent granted and enforced, in each country in which you seek patent protection for your invention, in accordance with the law of that country.
Therefore, one way of obtaining patents in a number of countries is to file a national patent application with each relevant national patent office.
In some regions, a regional patent office, for example, the European Patent Office (EPO) and the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO), accepts regional patent applications, or grants patents.
These have the same effect as applications filed, or patents granted, in the member states of that region.
This means that, in certain regions, you can obtain a regional patent from a regional patent office, which is valid in some or all of its member states.
If you are seeking patent protection in a number of countries worldwide, a good option is to file an international application under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), administered by WIPO.
Any resident or national of a state party to the PCT (contracting state) can file a single international application which has the effect of a national patent application (and certain regional patent applications) in some or all PCT contracting states.
In some cases, this can be a more straightforward choice than choosing to try to submit individual applications in each and every country in which you require protection.
What practical steps do I have to take to obtain patent protection?
The first step in securing a patent is the filing of a patent application.
Many patent offices provide a specific form to fill in.
In some patent offices, you can file a patent application on line.
In the patent application, in general, you must describe the title of the invention, as well as provide an indication of its technical field.
You must also include the background to and a description of the invention, in clear language and enough detail that a person with an average understanding of the field could use or reproduce the invention.
Such descriptions are usually accompanied by visual materials such as drawings, plans, or diagrams to better describe the invention and an abstract, which contains a brief summary of the invention.
You must also clearly and concisely define the matter for which patent protection is sought in the “claims” part of the patent application.
In addition, depending on the applicable patent law, you may need to submit various kinds of statements, declarations or supporting documents to a patent office.
In view of the complexity it is recommended that you consult a patent attorney or a patent agent to prepare a patent application.
What happens after I’ve submitted my application?
The procedures vary significantly from one country to another, so it is impossible to provide an exhaustive step-by-step overview.
If you wish to research a country’s legislation in the field of patents independently, you can browse the WIPO Lex database of intellectual property (IP) legislation from around the world.
However it is recommended that you consult either a practicing lawyer specializing in IP or the relevant IP office.
Can the decision to grant a patent be challenged?
The grant of a patent can be challenged either via a patent office or in a court of law.
court may invalidate or revoke a patent upon a successful challenge by a third party.
In addition, many patent offices provide administrative procedures that allow third parties to oppose to the grant of a patent (including so-called "opposition systems"), for example, on the basis that the claimed invention is not new or does not involve an inventive step.
Procedures for challenging patents differ from country to country.
Is it possible to extend the term of patent protection?
In some countries, patent protection may be extended beyond 20 years or a Supplementary Protection Certificate (SPC) may be issued in very specific cases.
The extension aims to compensate for the time expended on the administrative approval procedure before products can be put on the market.
The time taken for this procedure means that the patent owner may sometimes not be able to benefit from his right for a considerable period of time after the grant of the patent.
Can I obtain a patent for a software-related invention?
Possibly, but laws and practices in this regard can differ from one country or region to another
example, in some countries, “inventions” within the meaning of patent law must have a “technical character”.
In other countries, such requirements do not exist, meaning that in these countries software is generally patentable subject matter.
However this does not mean that all software will be able to be patent protected.
In order to obtain a patent, a software invention must not fall under other non-patentable subject matter (for example, abstract ideas or mathematical theories) and has to fulfill the other substantive patentability criteria (for example, novelty, inventive step [non-obviousness] and industrial applicability [usefulness]).
It is therefore recommended that you consult a practicing lawyer specializing in intellectual property or the intellectual property offices of those countries in which you are interested in obtaining protection.
Should a patent turn out not to be a viable option for your software-related invention, then using copyright as a means of protection may be an alternative.
In general, computer programs are protected under copyright as literary works.
The protection starts with the creation or fixation of the work, such as software or a webpage.
Moreover, in general, you are not required to register or deposit copies of a work in order to obtain copyright protection.
However, according to a well-established principle, copyright protection extends only to expressions, not to ideas, procedures, methods of operation, or mathematical concepts as such.
Thus many companies protect the object code of computer programs by copyright, while the source code is kept as a trade secret.
Can I patent my app?
Whether you can obtain patent protection for an app depends on which element of your app you wish to protect.
If you want to protect a technical idea or feature relating to the app, patent protection is a potential option.
Depending on the applicable national law, the software that runs your app may be able to be protected by patents if it has certain technical features.
You must be mindful however that your technical idea must meet all of the patentability requirements to obtain patent protection, and it may take years to get a patent.
In addition, it is important to ask yourself which element(s) of your app should be protected from free use by competitors.
The software that runs your app can be protected by copyright (potentially also by patents, as described above).
If you are interested in protecting logos or signs contained within your app however, you should consider protecting them using trademarks.
Literary and artistic works included within your app, such as original databases, musical works, audiovisual works, works of fine art and photographs, are protected by copyright.
Graphical objects and layouts can be protected using industrial designs.
How can I find the patent laws of various countries?
WIPO Lex provides easy access to intellectual property legislation from a wide range of countries and regions as well as to treaties on intellectual property.
Many national or regional patent offices also provide information concerning national or regional legislation on their websites.
Confidentiality
Can I obtain a patent and keep my invention secret?
No.
Patents are granted by patent offices in exchange for a full disclosure of the invention.
In general, the details of the invention are then published and made available to the public at large.
It should be noted that publication can take place at various stages of the procedure.
It should be noted that publication can take place at various stages of the procedure. In some countries, the patent document is only published after the granting of a patent.
In other countries, patent applications are generally published 18 months from the filing date or, where priority has been claimed, the priority date
Can I discuss details of my invention with a potential investor before filing a patent application?
It is important to file a patent application before publicly disclosing the details of an invention.
In general, any invention which is made public before an application is filed would be considered “prior art ” (although the definition of the term “prior art” is not uniform at the international level, in many countries, it refers to any information which has been made available to the public anywhere in the world by written or oral disclosure before the filing date).
In countries which apply the above definition of the term “prior art”, an applicant’s public disclosure of an invention prior to filing a patent application would prevent him/her from obtaining a valid patent for that invention, since the invention would not comply with the novelty requirement.
Some countries, however, allow for a grace period – usually between 6 and 12 months – which provides a safeguard for applicants who disclosed their inventions before filing a patent application.
Further, the novelty criteria may be interpreted differently depending on the applicable law.
It should also be kept in mind that applying early for patent protection will generally be helpful when seeking financial support to commercialize an invention.
If disclosing your invention before filing a patent application is unavoidable – for example, to a potential investor or a business partner – then any disclosure should be accompanied by a confidentiality or non-disclosure agreement.
Patents and business
How are patents relevant to my business?
While it is certainly true that not all enterprises develop patentable inventions, it is a wrong to believe that patents only apply to complex physical or chemical processes and products or that they are only useful to large corporations.
Patents can be obtained for any area of technology from paper clips to computers.
Moreover, when people think of patents, what usually comes to mind are major scientific breakthroughs such as Edison’s first electric lamp, or large corporations investing in research and development.
But, in fact, most patents aren’t granted for groundbreaking scientific breakthroughs, but rather for inventions that make improvements to existing inventions.
For example the second or third generation of a product or a process, that works in a more cost-effective or efficient manner.
Certain countries also have specific legal provisions for protecting incremental innovations.
These are called utility models and they tend to have a shorter duration than patents and are generally easier to obtain.
Why should I consider patenting my inventions?
Exclusive rights: Patents provide you with an exclusive right to prevent or stop others from commercially exploiting an invention for twenty years from the date of filing of the patent application. Return on investments: Having invested a considerable amount of money and time in developing innovative products, through exclusive patent rights, you may be able to establish yourself in the market as the pre-eminent player and to obtain higher returns on investments. Opportunity to license or sell the invention: If you choose not to exploit the patent yourself, you may sell it or license the commercialization of the patented invention to another enterprise, which could then be a source of income for your company. Increase in negotiating power: If your company is in the process of acquiring the rights to use the patents of another enterprise through a licensing contract, your patent portfolio will enhance your bargaining power. That is to say, your patents may prove to be of considerable interest to the enterprise with which you are negotiating, and you could enter into a cross-licensing arrangement where, simply put, your enterprise and the other agree to license respective patents to each other. Positive image for your enterprise: Business partners, investors and shareholders may perceive patent portfolios as a demonstration of the high level of expertise, specialization, and technological capacity within your company. This may prove useful for raising funds, finding business partners and raising your company’s market value.
What happens if I don’t patent my inventions?
If you don’t patent your invention, competitors may well take advantage of it.
If the product is successful, many other competitor firms will be tempted to make the same product by using your invention without needing to ask for your permission.
Larger enterprises may take advantage of economies of scale to produce the product more cheaply and compete at a more favorable market price.
his may considerably reduce your company’s market share for that product.
ven small competing enterprises may be able to produce the same product, and often sell it at a lower price as they would not have to recoup the original research and development costs incurred by your company.
But that’s not all.
The possibilities to license, sell or transfer technology will be severely hindered if you don’t patent your invention; indeed, without intellectual property (patent) rights, transfers of technology would be difficult if not impossible.
The transfer of technology assumes that one or more parties have legal ownership of a technology and this can only be effectively obtained through appropriate intellectual property (IP) protection.
Without IP protection for the technology in question, all sides tend to be suspicious of disclosing their inventions during technology transfer talks, fearing that the other side may “run away with the invention”.
Finally, you have to consider the possibility that someone else may patent your invention first. The first person or enterprise to file a patent for an invention will have the right to the patent.
This may in fact mean that, if you do not patent your inventions or inventions made the employees of your company, somebody else – who may have developed the same or an equivalent invention later – may do so.
Thus they could legitimately exclude your enterprise from the market, limit your activities to the continuation of prior use (where the patent legislation provides for such an exception), or ask your company to pay a licensing fee for using the invention.
However, to ensure that no one is able to patent your invention, instead of filing a patent application, you may disclose the invention to the public so that it becomes prior art for any patent application that will be filed after your publication, thereby placing it in the public domain (commonly known as defensive publication).
Because of the existence of such prior art, later filed patent applications containing the same or similar invention will be refused by a patent office on the grounds of the lack of novelty or inventive step.
At the same time, if you disclose your invention before filing a patent application, you will severely limit your possibility of obtaining patent protection on that invention.
How do I go about licensing my patent to a 3rd party?
Each situation is unique, so there is no one “correct” way to go about licensing a patent.
In some countries, a patent applicant’s intention to grant a license to third parties can be published in the official gazette.
In general however, it is possible to say that if you intend to license your patent, what is important is diligent preparation.
Before starting negotiation with a potential licensee, you should be informed of the current situation and future prospects of the relevant market and technology.
Moreover, you should find out about the commercial state of a potential licensee and the associated financial value of your patent, etc.
You should reflect on your own business objectives and carefully consider how entering into a licensing agreement fits into your short- and long-term business strategies.
Are utility models and trade secrets alternatives to patent protection?
In many cases, where an enterprise has merely improved an existing product and the said improvement is not sufficiently inventive to be deemed patentable, utility models may represent a good alternative, if available in the country in question.
On occasions, it may be advisable for your company to keep its innovations as trade secrets which requires, in particular, that sufficient measures are taken to keep the information confidential.
Another alternative strategy could be to ensure that no one is able to patent your invention by disclosing it (commonly known as defensive publication), thereby assuring its place in the public domain.
However, you should carefully reflect on using this strategy, since if you disclose your invention before filing a patent application, you will severely limit your possibility to obtain patent protection.
My employee has invented a new product or process: Who will own the rights to the patent?
In most countries, if an employee has developed an invention in execution of his/her employment contract – i.e. usually during his/her working time within the enterprise – the invention (and the related patent rights) will belong to the enterprise.
To avoid confusion and possible disputes, employers often specify issues of intellectual property ownership in employment contracts.
Depending on the merits of the case, the employee may, however, have a right to equitable remuneration in accordance with legislative provisions or the employment contract.
In any case, the employee will always retain the right to be mentioned as the inventor, unless he/she expressly renounces this right.
Patent information
What is patent information?
Patent information commonly refers to the information found in patent applications and granted patents.
This information may include bibliographic data about the inventor and patent applicant or patent holder, a description of the claimed invention and related developments in the field of technology, and a list of claims indicating the scope of patent protection sought by the applicant.
But why would patent applicants disclose such extensive information about their inventions?
The reason is that the patent system balances the exclusive rights granted to a patent holder over an invention with the obligation to publicly disclose information about the newly developed technology.
The requirement that a patent applicant disclose information about their invention(s) is very important for the continuous development of the technology.
This information provides a basis on which new technical solutions can be developed by other inventors.
Without publication there would be no way for the public to get information about new technical developments.
It is therefore not surprising that providing information for the public is a key task of industrial property offices.
Why should I care about patent information?
atent documents contain technological information that is often not divulged in any other form of publication, covering practically every field of technology.
They have a relatively standardized format and are classified according to technical fields to make identifying relevant documents even easier
The information contained in patent documents can be very useful to researchers, entrepreneurs, and many others, helping them: avoid duplication of research and development work; build on and improve existing products or processes; assess the state-of-the-art in a specific technological field, e.g. to get an idea of the latest developments in this field; evaluate the patentability of inventions, in particular the novelty and inventiveness of inventions (important criteria for determining their patentability), with a view to applying for patent protection domestically or abroad; identify inventions protected by patents, in particular to avoid infringement and seek opportunities for licensing; monitor activities of potential partners and competitors both within the country and abroad; and identify market niches or discover new trends in technology or product development at an early stage.
Where can I find patent information?
Patent documents are published by national and regional patent offices, usually 18 months after the date on which a patent application was first filed or once a patent has been granted for the invention claimed by the patent applicant.
Some patent offices publish patent documents through free-of-charge online databases, making it easier than ever to access patent information.
WIPO’s PATENTSCOPE database provides free-of-charge online access to millions of international patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) System as well as patent documents filed at national and regional patent offices such as the European Patent Office and the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
Though accessibility of patent information has grown as more and more patent offices make their patent documents available through online databases, certain skills are still required in order to make effective use of this information, including carrying out targeted patent searches and providing meaningful analysis of patent search results.
As a result, it may be advisable to contact a patent information professional for assistance where business-critical decisions are at stake.
WIPO Patent Information Services (WPIS) provide free-of-charge patent search services for individuals and institutions in developing countries.
WIPO also supports the establishment and development of Technology and Innovation Support Centers (TISCs), which provide patent information and related services in many countries around the world.
WIPO and patents
WIPO works to develop a balanced and effective international intellectual property (IP) system, a key part of which is dedicated to patents.
WIPO’s member states collaborate in various areas, including on agreeing the treaties and conventions that underpin the international IP system and that make the global exchange of creativity and innovation possible.
The IP services that WIPO offers, such as the facilitation of international patent protection under the PCT System, complement services available at the national and/or regional level.
It’s important to remember that WIPO does not actually grant patents per se; the grant or refusal of a patent still rests with the relevant national or regional patent office.
Trademarks
What is a trademark?
A trademark is a sign capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one enterprise from those of other enterprises.
Trademarks are protected by intellectual property rights.
How can I protect my trademark?
At the national/regional level, trademark protection can be obtained through registration, by filing an application for registration with the national/regional trademark office and paying the required fees. At the international level, you have two options: either you can file a trademark application with the trademark office of each country in which you are seeking protection, or you can use WIPO’s Madrid System.
What rights does trademark registration provide?
In principle, a trademark registration will confer an exclusive right to the use of the registered trademark.
This implies that the trademark can be exclusively used by its owner, or licensed to another party for use in return for payment.
Registration provides legal certainty and reinforces the position of the right holder, for example, in case of litigation.
How long does trademark protection last?
The term of trademark registration can vary, but is usually ten years.
It can be renewed indefinitely on payment of additional fees.
Trademark rights are private rights and protection is enforced through court orders.
What kinds of trademark can be registered? 
A word or a combination of words, letters, and numerals can perfectly constitute a trademark. But trademarks may also consist of drawings, symbols, three-dimensional features such as the shape and packaging of goods, non-visible signs such as sounds or fragrances, or color shades used as distinguishing features – the possibilities are almost limitless.
Industrial Designs
What is an industrial design?
In a legal sense, an industrial design constitutes the ornamental aspect of an article.
An industrial design may consist of three dimensional features, such as the shape of an article, or two dimensional features, such as patterns, lines or color.
What kind of protection does an industrial design right offer?
In principle, the owner of a registered industrial design or of a design patent has the right to prevent third parties from making, selling or importing articles bearing or embodying a design which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.
What kind of products can benefit from industrial design protection?
Industrial designs are applied to a wide variety of products of industry and handicraft items: from packages and containers to furnishing and household goods, from lighting equipment to jewelry, and from electronic devices to textiles. Industrial designs may also be relevant to graphic symbols, graphical user interfaces (GUI), and logos.
How are industrial designs protected?
In most countries, an industrial design needs to be registered in order to be protected under industrial design law as a “registered design”. In some countries, industrial designs are protected under patent law as “design patents ”.
Industrial design laws in some countries grant – without registration – time- and scope limited protection to so-called “unregistered industrial designs”.
Depending on the particular national law and the kind of design, industrial designs may also be protected as works of art under copyright law.
Frequently Asked Questions: Industrial Designs
Basics
What is an industrial design?
An industrial design may consist of three dimensional features, such as the shape of an article, or two dimensional features, such as patterns, lines or color.
What kind of protection does an industrial design right offer?
In principle, the owner of a registered industrial design or of a design patent has the right to prevent third parties from making, selling or importing articles bearing or embodying a design which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for commercial purposes.
What kind of products can benefit from industrial design protection?
Industrial designs are applied to a wide variety of products of industry and handicraft items: from packages and containers to furnishing and household goods, from lighting equipment to jewelry, and from electronic devices to textiles.
Industrial designs may also be relevant to graphic symbols, graphical user interfaces (GUI), and logos.
How are industrial designs protected?
In most countries, an industrial design needs to be registered in order to be protected under industrial design law as a “registered design”.
In some countries, industrial designs are protected under patent law as “design patents ”.
Industrial design laws in some countries grant – without registration – time- and scope limited protection to so-called “unregistered industrial designs”.
Depending on the particular national law and the kind of design, industrial designs may also be protected as works of art under copyright law.
How long does industrial design protection last?
Industrial design rights are granted for a limited period.
The duration of the protection of industrial designs varies from country to country, but it amounts at least to 10 years.
In many countries, the total duration of protection is divided into successive renewable periods.
Industrial design rights are usually enforced in a court, generally on the initiative of the owner of the rights, as provided for by the applicable law.
The remedies and penalties vary from country to country and could be civil (injunctions to desist from an infringement, payment of damages, etc.), criminal or administrative.
What is the difference between an industrial design right and a patent?
An industrial design right protects only the appearance or aesthetic features of a product, whereas a patent protects an invention that offers a new technical solution to a problem.
In principle, an industrial design right does not protect the technical or functional features of a product.
Such features could, however, potentially be protected by a patent.
Applying for industrial design protection
Depending on the applicable laws, independently created industrial designs must fulfil some or all of the following criteria: novelty/originality.
The assessment of novelty and originality varies from country to country.
In general, an industrial design is considered to be new or novel if it has not previously been disclosed to the public and it may be considered original if it significantly differs from known designs or combinations of known design features.
Who grants industrial design registrations or design patents?
Industrial design registrations or design patents are granted by the IP office of the country (or region) where an application is filed.
Do I need an agent to file an application?
Depending on the applicable law, you may file an application for the registration of an industrial design or for the grant of a design patent yourself or you may be required to appoint an agent.
How much does it cost to obtain industrial design protection?
As the costs for filing for protection vary from country to country, it is best to contact your national (regional) IP office for details on the fee structure.
If protection abroad is sought, in addition to the ordinary filing fees, you should take into account the translation costs and the costs of using a local agent.
Is the industrial design protection granted in one country valid in every country?
Industrial design rights are territorial.
This means that these rights are limited to the country (or region) where protection is granted.
How can industrial design rights be obtained in other countries?
At present, no “world” or “international” industrial design right exists.
n general, in order to obtain protection in other countries, an application for the registration of an industrial design or for the grant of a patent for an industrial design must be filed in each country where protection is sought, in accordance with the law of that country.
In other words, if protection is sought in countries A and B, an application should be filed with the intellectual property (IP) office of country A and another application with the IP office of country B.
To avoid having to submit applications in each and every country where protection is sought, WIPO’s Hague System provides a practical business solution for registering up to 100 designs in a large number of territories – all through one single international application.
In certain regions, it is also possible to obtain protection for industrial designs in the region concerned by filing an application with a regional IP office.
This is the case in the African Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI), which registers industrial designs in states party to the Bangui Agreement; the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO), which registers industrial designs in states party to the Lusaka Agreement; the Benelux Office for Intellectual Property (BOIP), which registers industrial designs in the three “Benelux” countries; and the European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO), which registers industrial designs in the member states of the European Union.
What practical steps do I have to take to obtain protection for my industrial design?
An application for the registration of an industrial design or for the grant of a patent for an industrial design can be filed with the intellectual property (IP) office of the country (or region) in which protection is sought.
Alternatively WIPO’s Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial Designs provides a practical business solution for registering up to 100 designs in a large number of territories through filing one single international application.
When should I file an application?
Timing is very important.
Taking into account the novelty and/or originality requirement for industrial designs in most legislation, it is in general crucial to file an application for registration or for the grant of a patent before publicly disclosing it, so as to avoid destroying its novelty/originality.
If the industrial design has already been disclosed to the public (for example, by an advertisement published on the company’s website), it may no longer be considered as “new” or “original” and may become part of the public domain.
Some countries, however, allow for a “grace period” to file after disclosure of the industrial design.
Such a period provides a safeguard for applicants who have disclosed their industrial design before filing an application.
Such a “grace period” is usually 6 or 12 months.
How can I search for industrial designs that have already been registered?
Intellectual property offices may make online databases of industrial design/patent for industrial design registrations available.
How can I find the industrial design laws of various countries?
WIPO Lex provides easy access to intellectual property legislation from a wide range of countries and regions as well as to treaties on intellectual property.
Many national or regional intellectual property offices also provide information concerning national or regional legislation on their websites.
Industrial designs and business
How are industrial designs relevant to my business?
Industrial designs make a product attractive and appealing to customers.
Design drives consumer’s choice: the appearance of a product can be a key factor in the consumer’s purchase decision.
In other words, the success or failure of a product may rest, at least partially, on how it looks.
Industrial designs can therefore be very important for both small- and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) and larger companies alike, regardless of their sector of activity.
What are the advantages to my business of protecting my industrial designs?
The protection of industrial designs should form an integral part of any business strategy.
The main reasons to protect industrial designs are the following: Return on investments: Protection contributes to obtaining a return on investments made in creating and marketing attractive and innovative products. Exclusive rights: Protection provides exclusive rights for at least 10 years, so as to prevent or stop others from commercially exploiting or copying the industrial design. Strengthen brands: Industrial designs can be an important element of a company’s brand. Protecting industrial designs contributes to protecting a company’s brand. Opportunity to license or sell: Protection provides rights that may be sold or licensed to another enterprise, which will then be a source of income for the owner of the rights. Positive image: Protection helps convey a positive image of a company, since industrial designs are business assets which may increase the market value of a company and its products. Reward: Protecting industrial designs rewards and encourages creativity.
What happens if I don’t protect my industrial design(s)?
If you don’t protect your industrial design(s) then it follows that you may not enjoy exclusive rights to them.
Consequently, your competitors may take a product to market, incorporating your industrial design, without getting your permission.
So if a competitor or anyone else makes, sells or imports products bearing or embodying a design which is a copy (or substantially copy) of your industrial design without your consent, you will have no legal means to fight them.
Moreover, it is likely that copies of the industrial design will be sold at a lower price as competitors do not have to recoup the investments made in the creative process.
This could reduce your market share for the product in question and be harmful both to your firm’s reputation and to that of your products.
Geographical Indications
What is a geographical indication?
A geographical indication (GI) is a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are due to that origin.
In order to function as a GI, a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place.
In addition, the qualities, characteristics or reputation of the product should be essentially due to the place of origin
Since the qualities depend on the geographical place of production, there is a clear link between the product and its original place of production.
What rights does a geographical indication provide?
A geographical indication right enables those who have the right to use the indication to prevent its use by a third party whose product does not conform to the applicable standards.
For example, in the jurisdictions in which the Darjeeling geographical indication is protected, producers of Darjeeling tea can exclude use of the term “Darjeeling” for tea not grown in their tea gardens or not produced according to the standards set out in the code of practice for the geographical indication.
However, a protected geographical indication does not enable the holder to prevent someone from making a product using the same techniques as those set out in the standards for that indication
Protection for a geographical indication is usually obtained by acquiring a right over the sign that constitutes the indication.
For what type of products can geographical indications be used?
Geographical indications are typically used for agricultural products, foodstuffs, wine and spirit drinks, handicrafts, and industrial products.
How are geographical indications protected?
There are three main ways to protect a geographical indication: so-called sui generis systems (i.e. special regimes of protection); using collective or certification marks; and methods focusing on business practices, including administrative product approval schemes.
These approaches involve differences with respect to important questions, such as the conditions for protection or the scope of protection.
On the other hand, two of the modes of protection — namely sui generis systems and collective or certification mark systems — share some common features, such as the fact that they set up rights for collective use by those who comply with defined standards.
Broadly speaking geographical indications are protected in different countries and regional systems through a wide variety of approaches and often using a combination of two or more of the approaches outlined above.
These approaches have been developed in accordance with different legal traditions and within a framework of individual historical and economic conditions.
Laws and treaties
A number of international treaties deal partly or entirely with the protection of geographical indications or appellations of origin.
Below are links to relevant treaties administered by WIPO, as well as to the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).
Relevant treaties administered by WIPO
Paris Convention Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive Indications of Source on Goods Lisbon Agreement Madrid Agreement Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Overview of the TRIPS Agreement on the WTO website
IP laws and treaties (WIPO Lex)
The WIPO Lex database is a comprehensive search tool that allows you to search national laws and international treaties on intellectual property.
Standing Committee
The Standing Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications (SCT) is the forum where WIPO's member states discuss policy and legal issues relating to the international development of law and standards for geographical indications and appellations of origin.
What is a geographical indication?
A geographical indication (GI) is a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are due to that origin.
In order to function as a GI, a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place.
In addition, the qualities, characteristics or reputation of the product should be essentially due to the place of origin.
Since the qualities depend on the geographical place of production, there is a clear link between the product and its original place of production.
What rights does a geographical indication provide?
A geographical indication right enables those who have the right to use the indication to prevent its use by a third party whose product does not conform to the applicable standards.
For example, in the jurisdictions in which the Darjeeling geographical indication is protected, producers of Darjeeling tea can exclude use of the term “Darjeeling” for tea not grown in their tea gardens or not produced according to the standards set out in the code of practice for the geographical indication.
However, a protected geographical indication does not enable the holder to prevent someone from making a product using the same techniques as those set out in the standards for that indication.
Protection for a geographical indication is usually obtained by acquiring a right over the sign that constitutes the indication.
For what type of products can geographical indications be used?
Geographical indications are typically used for agricultural products, foodstuffs, wine and spirit drinks, handicrafts, and industrial products.
How are geographical indications protected?
There are three main ways to protect a geographical indication: so-called sui generis systems (i.e. special regimes of protection); using collective or certification marks; and methods focusing on business practices, including administrative product approval schemes.
These approaches involve differences with respect to important questions, such as the conditions for protection or the scope of protection.
On the other hand, two of the modes of protection — namely sui generis systems and collective or certification mark systems — share some common features, such as the fact that they set up rights for collective use by those who comply with defined standards.
Broadly speaking geographical indications are protected in different countries and regional systems through a wide variety of approaches and often using a combination of two or more of the approaches outlined above.
These approaches have been developed in accordance with different legal traditions and within a framework of individual historical and economic conditions.
How long does geographical indication protection last?
In many sui generis legislations, registrations for geographical indications are not subject to a specific period of validity.
This means that the protection for a registered geographical indication will remain valid unless the registration is cancelled.
Geographical indications registered as collective and certification marks are generally protected for renewable ten-year periods.
Who can use a protected geographical indication?
The right to use a protected geographical indication belongs to producers in the geographical area defined, who comply with the specific conditions of production for the product.
How are geographical indication rights enforced?
Like all intellectual property rights, the rights to geographical indications (GI) are enforced by the application of national legislation, typically in a court of law.
The right to take action could rest with a competent authority, the public prosecutor, or to any interested party, whether a natural person or a legal entity, whether public or private.
The sanctions provided for in national legislation could be civil (injunctions restraining or prohibiting unlawful acts, actions for damages, etc.), criminal, or administrative.
What is the difference between a geographical indication and a trademark?
Geographical indications (GIs) identify a good as originating from a particular place.
By contrast, a trademark identifies a good or service as originating from a particular company.
A trademark often consists of a fanciful or arbitrary sign.
In contrast, the name used as a geographical indication is usually predetermined by the name of a geographical area.
Finally, a trademark can be assigned or licensed to anyone, anywhere in the world, because it is linked to a specific company and not to a particular place.
In contrast, a GI may be used by any persons in the area of origin, who produces the good according to specified standards, but because of its link with the place of origin, a GI cannot be assigned or licensed to someone outside that place or not belonging to the group of authorized producers.
What is the difference between a geographical indication and an indication of source?
An indication of source can be defined as an indication referring to a country (or to a place in that country) as being the country or place of origin of a product.
In contrast to a geographical indication, an indication of source does not imply the presence of any special quality, reputation, or characteristic of the product essentially attributable to its place of origin.
Indications of source only require that the product on which the indication of source is used originate in a certain geographical area.
Examples of indications of source are the mention, on a product, of the name of a country, or indications such as “made in ….”, “product of ….”, etc..
What is the difference between a geographical indication and an appellation of origin?
Appellations of origin are a special kind of geographical indication (GI).
GIs and appellations of origin require a qualitative link between the product to which they refer and its place of origin.
Both inform consumers about a product’s geographical origin and a quality or characteristic of the product linked to its place of origin.
The basic difference between the two concepts is that the link with the place of origin must be stronger in the case of an appellation of origin.
The quality or characteristics of a product protected as an appellation of origin must result exclusively or essentially from its geographical origin.
This generally means that the raw materials should be sourced in the place of origin and that the processing of the product should also take place there.
In the case of GIs, a single criterion attributable to geographical origin is sufficient – be it a quality or other characteristic of the product – or even just its reputation.
What is the relationship between traditional knowledge (TK) and geographical indications?
Products identified by a geographical indication are often the result of traditional processes and knowledge carried forward by a community in a particular region from generation to generation.
Similarly, some products identified by a geographical indication (GI) may embody characteristic elements of the traditional artistic heritage developed in a given region, known as “traditional cultural expressions” (TCEs).
This is particularly true for tangible products such as handicrafts, made using natural resources and having qualities derived from their geographical origin.
GIs do not directly protect the subject matter generally associated with TK or TCEs, which remains in the public domain under conventional IP systems.
However, GIs may be used to indirectly contribute to their protection, for instance, by preserving them for future generations.
This can be done, for example, through the description of the production standards for a GI product, which may include a description of a traditional process or traditional knowledge.
What is a “generic” geographical indication?
In the context of geographical indications, generic terms are names which, although they denote the place from where a product originates, have become the term customary for such a product.
An example of a GI that has become a generic term is Camembert for cheese.
This name can now be used to designate any camembert-type cheese.
The transformation of a geographical indication into a generic term may occur in different countries and at different times.
This may lead to situations where a specific indication is considered to constitute a geographical indication in some countries, whereas the same indication may be regarded as a generic term in other countries.
What are “homonymous” geographical indications?
Homonymous geographical indications (GI) are those that are spelled or pronounced alike, but which identify products originating in different places, usually in different countries.
In principle, these indications should coexist, but such coexistence may be subject to certain conditions. For example, it may be required that they be used only together with additional information as to the origin of the product in order to prevent consumers from being misled.
A GI may be refused protection if, due to the existence of another homonymous indication, its use would be considered potentially misleading to consumers with regard to the product’s true origin.
Applying for geographical indication protection
Who can request protection for a geographical indication?
Protection may be requested by a group of producers of the product identified by the geographical indication.
The producers may be organized as an entity, such as a cooperative or association, which represents them and ensures that the product fulfils certain requirements which they have agreed upon or adhered to.
In some jurisdictions, protection may also be requested by a national competent authority (for example, a local government authority).
Who grants protection for geographical indications?
Protection for a geographical indication (GI) is granted by a national (regional) competent authority upon request.
In some countries the function of granting GI protection is carried out by a special body responsible for GI protection.
In other countries, the national intellectual property (IP) office carries out this function.
What conditions must be met to obtain geographical indication protection?
A sign must qualify as a geographical indication under the applicable law and not be subject to any obstacles to registering a geographical indication (GI).
Generally, an important requirement under the definition, is that the good identified by the GI needs to have a link to the geographical origin.
This link may be determined by a given quality, reputation or other characteristic essentially due to the geographical origin.
In many legislation a single criterion attributable to geographical origin is sufficient, be it a quality or other characteristic of the product, or only its reputation.
Do I need a lawyer to protect my geographical indications?
A request of protection for a geographical indication may be filed, depending on the applicable law, without assistance from an IP lawyer or specialized agent.
However, in many countries an applicant whose residence or principal place of business is outside the country where the protection is sought must be represented by a lawyer or agent admitted to practice in that country.
Information on the admitted lawyers and agents may be obtained directly from the national IP offices.
How much does it cost to obtain geographical indication protection?
As the costs for filing for protection vary from country to country, it is best to contact your national (regional) IP office for details on the fee structure.
If protection abroad is sought, in addition to the ordinary filing fees, you should take into account the translation costs and the costs of using a local agent.
It’s worth remembering that in order to protect a GI abroad, there may be a requirement to first protect the GI in the country of origin.
Are there any obstacles to protecting a geographical indication?
Firstly the following are generally excluded from geographical indication protection: signs that do not qualify as geographical indications under the applicable law.
From a legal point of view, potential obstacles to successfully registering a geographical indication (GI) may include the following: Conflict with a prior mark. Generic character of the term that constitutes the GI. The existence of a homonymous geographical indication , the use of which would be considered potentially misleading as to the product’s true origin. The indication’s name being that of a plant variety or animal breed. The lack of protection of the GI in its country of origin.
What practical steps do I have to take to obtain geographical indication protection?
The practical steps to be taken vary depending largely on the purpose and the geographical scope of the protection you desire.
In the broadest terms, if you are considering protection limited to the national level, then your first port-of-call should be your relevant intellectual property (IP) office or the national (regional) competent authority in charge of GIs.
If, however, you are considering protection in more than one territory, then WIPO’s Lisbon System could be one appropriate alternative, amongst others
Can I obtain geographical indication protection that is valid in multiple countries?
Geographical indication rights are territorial.
This means that these rights are limited to the country (or region) where protection is granted.
At present, no “world” or “international” geographical indication (GI) right exists.
There are currently four main ways of protecting a geographical indication abroad:
By obtaining protection directly in the jurisdiction concerned: In general, in order to protect a GI in their territory, many jurisdictions require that the GI already be protected in its country of origin.
Once a GI is protected in its country of origin, it would be possible to seek its protection in other jurisdictions under the means of protection available in those jurisdictions.
By taking advantage of bilateral agreements concluded between countries: Bilateral agreements are typically concluded between two countries on the basis of reciprocity.
They may be limited to certain economic sectors or products, e.g. wine and spirit drinks, or form part of a wider trade agreement.
Through WIPO’s Lisbon System for the International Registration of Appellations of Origin: The Lisbon System offers a means of obtaining protection for an appellation of origin already protected in one member state in the territories of all other members.
This can be done through a single registration called “an international registration”.
Through the Madrid System for the International Registration of Marks (i.e. as a collective or certification mark): To avoid filing trademark applications in each and every country where protection is sought, it may be possible to file a single international application using WIPO’s Madrid System.
How can I search for geographical indications that have already been registered?
There is no comprehensive way to search all geographical indications registered throughout the world.
You can, however, contact the relevant national intellectual property office, which may or may not offer a searchable database of GIs registered in their territory.
How can I find the geographical indication laws of various countries?
You can use the WIPO Lex search engine to browse the intellectual property (IP) laws of WIPO, WTO, and UN members.
Just select the country(ies) you’re interested in and choose “geographical indications” as a subject matter filter.
In addition, information on geographical indications may be provided by national or regional IP offices.
A directory of IP offices is available on the WIPO website.
Geographical indications and business
How are geographical indications relevant to my business?
Consumers are paying more and more attention to the geographical origin of products and many care about specific characteristics present in the products they buy.
In some cases, the “place of origin” suggests to consumers that the product will have a particular quality or characteristic that they may value.
Geographical indications (GI) therefore function as product differentiators on the market, by enabling consumers to distinguish between products with geographical origin-based characteristics and others without those characteristics.
Geographical indications can thus be a key element in developing collective brands for quality-bound-to-origin products.
What are the advantages to my business of obtaining protection for a geographical indication?
Protecting a geographical indication (GI) enables those who have the right to use the indication to take measures against others who use it without permission and benefit from its reputation (“free-riders”).
A geographical indication’s reputation is a valuable, collective, and intangible asset. If not protected, it could be used without restriction and its value diminished and eventually lost.
Protecting a GI is also a way to prevent registration of the indication as a trademark by a third party and to limit the risk of the indication becoming a generic term.
In general, GIs, backed up by solid business management, can bring with them: Competitive advantage More added value to a product Increased export opportunities A strengthened brand
Trade Secrets
What is a trade secret?
Trade secrets are intellectual property (IP) rights on confidential information which may be sold or licensed.
In general, to qualify as a trade secret, the information must be: commercially valuable because it is secret, be known only to a limited group of persons, and be subject to reasonable steps taken by the rightful holder of the information to keep it secret, including the use of confidentiality agreements for business partners and employees.
The unauthorized acquisition, use or disclosure of such secret information in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices by others is regarded as an unfair practice and a violation of the trade secret protection.
What kind of information is protected by trade secrets?
In general, any confidential business information which provides an enterprise a competitive edge and is unknown to others may be protected as a trade secret.
Trade secrets encompass both technical information, such as information concerning manufacturing processes, pharmaceutical test data, designs and drawings of computer programs, and commercial information, such as distribution methods, list of suppliers and clients, and advertising strategies.
A trade secret may be also made up of a combination of elements, each of which by itself is in the public domain, but where the combination, which is kept secret, provides a competitive advantage.
Other examples of information that may be protected by trade secrets include financial information, formulas and recipes and source codes.
What kind of protection does a trade secret offer?
Depending on the legal system, the legal protection of trade secrets forms part of the general concept of protection against unfair competition or is based on specific provisions or case law on the protection of confidential information.
While a final determination of whether trade secret protection is violated or not depends on the circumstances of each individual case, in general, unfair practices in respect of secret information include industrial or commercial espionage, breach of contract and breach of confidence.
A trade secret owner, however, cannot stop others from using the same technical or commercial information, if they acquired or developed such information independently by themselves through their own R&D, reverse engineering or marketing analysis, etc. Since trade secrets are not made public, unlike patents, they do not provide “defensive” protection, as being prior art.
For example, if a specific process of producing Compound X has been protected by a trade secret, someone else can obtain a patent or a utility model on the same invention, if the inventor arrived at that invention independently.
Frequently Asked Questions: Trade Secrets
Basics
What is a trade secret?
Trade secrets are intellectual property (IP) rights on confidential information which may be sold or licensed.
In general, to qualify as a trade secret, the information must be: commercially valuable because it is secret, be known only to a limited group of persons, and be subject to reasonable steps taken by the rightful holder of the information to keep it secret, including the use of confidentiality agreements for business partners and employees.
The unauthorized acquisition, use or disclosure of such secret information in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices by others is regarded as an unfair practice and a violation of the trade secret protection.
What kind of information is protected by trade secrets?
In general, any confidential business information which provides an enterprise a competitive edge and is unknown to others may be protected as a trade secret.
Trade secrets encompass both technical information, such as information concerning manufacturing processes, experimental research data, software algorithms and commercial information such as distribution methods, list of suppliers and clients, and advertising strategies.
A trade secret may be also made up of a combination of elements, each of which by itself is in the public domain, but where the combination, which is kept secret, provides a competitive advantage.
Other examples of information that may be protected by trade secrets include financial information, formulas and recipes and source codes.
What kind of protection does a trade secret offer?
Depending on the legal system, the legal protection of trade secrets forms part of the general concept of protection against unfair competition or is based on specific provisions or case law on the protection of confidential information.
While a final determination of whether trade secret protection is violated or not depends on the circumstances of each individual case, in general, unfair practices in respect of secret information include breach of contract breach of confidence and industrial or commercial espionage.
A trade secret owner, however, cannot stop others from using the same technical or commercial information, if they acquired or developed such information independently by themselves through their own R&D, reverse engineering or marketing analysis, etc.
Since trade secrets are not made public, unlike patents, they do not provide “defensive” protection, as being prior art.
For example, if a specific process of producing Compound X has been protected by a trade secret, someone else can obtain a patent or a utility model on the same invention, if the inventor arrived at that invention independently.
Protection and legal framework
How are trade secrets protected?
Contrary to patents, trade secrets are protected without registration, that is, trade secrets require no procedural formalities for their protection.
A trade secret can be protected for an unlimited period of time, unless it is discovered or legally acquired by others and disclosed to the public.
For these reasons, the protection of trade secrets may appear to be particularly attractive for certain companies.
There are, however, some conditions for the information to be considered a trade secret.
Compliance with such conditions may turn out to be more difficult and costly than it would appear at a first glance.
What are the requirements for trade secret protection?
In order for information to be protected as trade secret, it shall meet the following criteria.
The information must be secret (i.e., it is not generally known among, or readily accessible, to circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question).
Absolute secrecy is not required.
For example, trade secrets can be kept by several parties, as long as it is not known to other persons working in the field. It must have actual or potential commercial value because it is secret.
It must have been subject to reasonable steps by the rightful holder of the information to keep it secret (e.g., through confidentiality agreements).
While the “reasonable” steps may depend on the circumstances of each case, marking confidential documents, placing physical and electronic restrictions to access trade secret information, introducing a systematic monitoring system and raising awareness of employees are the measures taken to safeguard trade secrets.
Example
A company develops a process for the manufacturing of its products that allows it to produce its goods in a more cost-effective manner.
Such a process provides the enterprise a competitive edge over its competitors.
he enterprise in question may therefore value its know-how as a trade secret and would not want competitors to learn about it.
It makes sure that only a limited number of people know the secret, and those who know it are made well aware that it is confidential.
When dealing with third parties or licensing its know-how, the enterprise signs confidentiality agreements to ensure that all parties know that the secret information must not be disclosed.
The company should also take reasonable measures to keep the know-how secret, such as putting access control and security measures in place and establishing internal procedures for systematic controlling and monitoring of trade secret information.
In such circumstances, the misappropriation of the information by a competitor or by any third party would be considered a violation of the enterprise's trade secrets.
However, such measures will only be effective if the products could not easily be “reverse engineered” by competitors.
What are the rights conferred by trade secrets?
In general, trade secret protection confers owners the right to prevent the information lawfully within their control from being disclosed, acquired or used by others without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial practice.
While the determination of such practices depends ultimately on the circumstances of each individual case, in general, unfair practices in respect of secret information include industrial or commercial espionage, breach of contract, breach of confidence and inducement to breach.
It further includes the use or disclosure of a trade secret by a third party who knew, or was grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition of the confidential information.
In consequence, the use of a trade secret by a person who acquired that information in a legitimate business transaction without negligence is not deemed illegal.
For example, a competitor may purchase a product, examine the construction or composition of the product and extract the secret knowledge embedded in the product (so-called reverse engineering).
Such act is not violation of trade secret protection.
Is it possible to sell and license trade secrets?
Trade secrets are property rights and can be assigned or licensed to other persons.
The holder of trade secret has the right to authorize a third party to access and use the trade secret information.
However, due to the secret nature of trade secret information, it is not always easy for others to determine whether the information concerned meets the conditions for trade secret protection.
Therefore, compared with a patent, it is more difficult to transfer and license confidential information and to resolve disputes which may arise.
Since a potential licensee needs to access the trade secret information in order to assess its value or utility, a non-disclosure or confidentiality agreement needs to be signed between the potential licensor and licensee.
Further, in order to maintain the secrecy of trade secret information, a trade secret licensor should require a licensee to take reasonable steps to keep that information secret.
What are the remedies provided to the holder of secret information?
Most countries provide for remedies in criminal, administrative, commercial and/or civil law, in particular, tort law, contractual law and specific legislation on unfair competition.
In general, a trade secret owner can collect damages from the person who violated the trade secret for the economic injury suffered.
The trade secret laws of some countries might also permit the use of injunctions, which requires the cessation of the use of any products that have been created through the use of trade secret information contrary to honest commercial practices.
In some countries, for particular cases of trade secret violation, criminal penalties are available.
What is the international legal framework of trade secret protection?
According to Article 10bis of the Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (Paris Convention), member States have to provide effective protection against unfair competition.
However, the Paris Convention does not mention or define trade secrets beyond the general protection against any act contrary to honest commercial practices.
While the conditions for trade secret protection vary from country to country, some general standards on trade secret law are found in Article 39 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement).
According to that Article, trade secret protection is available if the following conditions are met: The information must be secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components, generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question; It must have commercial value because it is secret; and It must have been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret.
Why is trade secret protection necessary?
In countries with market economy systems, both in the developing and developed world, fair competition between enterprises is considered as the essential means for satisfying the supply and demand of the economy, and serving the interests of the consumers and the society as a whole.
Further, competition is one of the main driving forces of innovation. The law of unfair competition, including trade secret law, is considered necessary to ensure the fair functioning of the market and to promote innovation by suppressing anti-competitive business behaviors.
Business and practical considerations
What are the advantages and disadvantages of trade secrets compared to patenting?
There are essentially two kinds of trade secrets.
On the one hand, trade secrets may concern valuable information that do not meet the patentability criteria, and therefore can only be protected as trade secrets.
This would be the case for commercial information or manufacturing processes that are not sufficiently inventive to obtain a patent (though the latter may qualify utility model protection).
On the other hand, trade secrets may concern inventions that would fulfill the patentability criteria, and therefore, could be protected by patents.
In that case, the company will face a choice: to patent the invention or to keep it as a trade secret.
Some advantages of trade secrets include: trade secret protection is not limited in time (patents last in general for up to 20 years). It may continue indefinitely as long as the secret is not revealed to the public; trade secrets involve no registration costs (though keeping the information confidential may entail high costs in certain cases); trade secrets have immediate effect; and trade secret protection does not require compliance with formalities or public disclosure.
There are, however, some concrete disadvantages of protecting confidential business information as a trade secret, especially when the information meets the criteria for patentability: If the secret is embodied in an innovative product, others may be able to inspect it, dissect it and analyze it (i.e. “reverse engineer” it) and discover the secret and be thereafter entitled to use it. Trade secret protection does not provide the exclusive right to exclude third parties from making commercial use of it. Only patents and utility models can provide this type of protection. A trade secret may be patented by someone else who developed the relevant information by legitimate means, for example, inventions developed independently by others. Once the secret is made public, anyone may have access to it and use it at will. The more people know about the trade secret, the more difficult it will be to keep it secret. Trade secret protection is effective only against illicit acquisition, use or disclosure of the confidential information. A trade secret is more difficult to enforce than a patent. Often, it is quite difficult to prove the violation of trade secrets. The level of protection granted to trade secrets varies significantly from country to country, but is generally considered weak, particularly when compared with the protection granted by a patent. Due to their secret nature, selling or licensing trade secrets is more difficult than patents.
While patents and trade secrets may be perceived as alternative means of protecting inventions, they are often complementary to each other.
Often trade secret law complements patent law in earlier stages of the innovation process by allowing inventors to work on their ideas until they become a patentable invention.
Moreover, valuable know-how on how to exploit a patented invention in the most commercially successful manner is often kept as a trade secret.
In which cases trade secret protection may be beneficial?
While a decision will have to be taken on a case-by-case basis, in the following circumstances, it would be advisable to consider trade secret protection: When the subject matter which has been kept secret is not patentable. When the likelihood is high that the information can be kept secret for a considerable period of time. If the secret information consists of a patentable invention, trade secret protection could be attractive if the secret can be kept confidential for over 20 years (duration of patent protection) and if others are not likely to come up with the same invention in a legitimate way. When the trade secret is not considered to be of such great value to be deemed worth a patent (though a utility model may be a good alternative in countries where utility model protection exists). When the secret relates to a manufacturing process rather than to a product, as products would be more likely to be reverse engineered. Before filing a patent and during the patent prosecution process until the patent application is published by the patent office (generally after 18 months from the filing date or the priority date).
It is important to bear in mind, however, that trade secret protection may be more difficult to enforce in most countries, that the conditions for, and scope of, its protection may vary significantly from country to country and that significant and possibly costly efforts to preserve secrecy may be required.
Further, it has to be kept in mind that, once the secret is made public, the protection ends. WIPO Lex provides easy access to national and regional legislation on patents, utility models, competition and undisclosed information (trade secrets).
Which precautionary measures should be taken by business?
Trade secrets are widely used by business. In fact, many companies rely heavily on trade secrets for the protection of their intellectual property (although in many cases, they may not even be aware that trade secrets are legally protected).
Known examples are the Coca Cola formula and sources codes for software.
It is important, therefore, to make sure that enterprises take all necessary measures to protect their trade secrets effectively. This includes: Firstly, considering whether the secret is patentable and, if so, whether it would not be better protected by a patent. Secondly, making sure that a limited number of persons know the secret and that all those who do are well aware that it is confidential information. For example, such steps can include restricting access to buildings, marking confidential documents and establishing IT security. Thirdly, including confidentiality agreements within employees’ contracts. Under the law of many countries, however, employees owe confidentiality to their employer even without such agreements. The duty to maintain confidentiality on the employer’s secrets generally remains, at least for a certain period of time, even after the employee has left the employment. Fourthly, signing confidentiality agreements with business partners whenever disclosing confidential information.
What protection is provided against the use of secret information by employees or former employees?
The business that holds the trade secret is responsible for making every effort it can to keep it confidential.
Employees can be required to sign agreements that protect trade secrets.
In particular, when contractors or employees leave, it is important to make sure that they will not compete with the business after they leave, in addition to signing a confidentiality agreement.
hose agreements are known as confidentiality, non-disclosure and non-compete contracts.
If those agreements are violated, an employee might face penalties, along with damages to the company.
However, it has to be kept in mind that those contracts should not restrict the contractor's or employees’ rights to earn a living.
Can more than one person have trade secret rights to the same information?
It is possible that more than one person or entities can claim rights to the same trade secret on the same technology or commercial information if both independently developed that technology and both take reasonable steps to keep it a secret, as long as the technology is not “generally known”.